Signals (#2)
temporalio/edu-interacting-with-workflows-typescript: signaling-your-workflows/signals-in-event-history.md

# Signals in the Event History

<iframe width="1040" height="585" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xscX8ffBPOI?rel=0&amp;iv_load_policy=3&amp;modestbranding=1&amp;showsearch=0&amp;showinfo=0&amp;wmode=transparent" title="Signals in the Event History with TypeScript" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<details>
<summary>Video Transcript</summary>

Let's take a look at the Event History of the `Sending Signals` exercise that you just completed. If you haven't completed the exercise yet, please complete the exercise before continuing with this video. You can find the code to the exercise in the previous chapter.

> As a quick debrief, in this chapter, we ran two Workflows: The first Workflow, known as `pizzaWorkflow`, dealt with calculating the price of the pizzas, returning the order and more. This Workflow listened for a Signal coming from the second Workflow, called `orderFulfilled` Workflow. The `orderFulfilled` Workflow was responsible for fulfilling the order like managing the processes for delivering and making the pizzas. If the order was fulfilled successfully, it sent a Signal to `pizzaWorkflow`, letting it know that the order was done successfully. Once `pizzaWorkflow` received this Signal, it then completes successfully with the order details and bills the customer. If it receives a Signal that the order was not fulfilled, it does not bill the customer.

Reviewer: > As a quick debrief, in this chapter, we ran two Workflows

I think _in this exercise_ would be better than _in this chapter_, since this is explaining what happened in the exercise they just completed.

Reviewer: > for fulfilling the order like managing the processes for delivering and making the pizzas.

I struggled with that wording. It seems like it's missing a word or something. How about this?

> for fulfilling the order, including managing processes for delivering and making the pizzas.

Author: Changed!

> We already have the Temporal server and worker running. I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows: `signal-fulfilled-order-Z1238` and `pizza-workflow-order-Z1238`. Let's take a look at the Workflow that sends a Signal first, the `fulfillOrderWorkflow`.

Reviewer: "Temporal server and worker running" should probably be "Temporal Cluster and Worker running.

> We'll go ahead and speed through some of the initial steps since they should be a review from our "Exploring Durable Execution" courses. The first Events that occur will be `WorkflowExecutionStarted`, `WorkflowTaskScheduled`, and `WorkflowTaskStarted`. I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows.

Reviewer: >  I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows.

This seems like a (mostly) duplicated sentence from the previous paragraph (which says "I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows:").

Author: Whoops! Fixed

> Now, the Worker can't make further progress on the Workflow until the following Activity Execution, `makePizzas` concludes, so it notifies the Cluster that the current Workflow Task is complete. In response, the Cluster adds a new Event to history to schedule the `makePizzas` Activity. The call to the `makePizzas` Activity causes the Worker to issue a Command to the Temporal Cluster. In response to this Command, the Temporal Cluster creates an Activity Task, adds it to the Task Queue, and appends the `ActivityTaskScheduled` Event to this Workflow Execution's history. The Temporal Cluster creates an Activity Task and adds it to the Task Queue. Since the Worker Process has capacity to perform additional work, it accepts the Activity Task. The Worker Entity now invokes the function corresponding to the Activity Definition for the `makePizzas` Activity. The Worker then runs the code within the function. When the Activity function returns, the Worker notifies the cluster that the Activity Task is complete, resulting in `ActivityTaskCompleted`.

Reviewer: > the Cluster adds a new Event to history to schedule the makePizzas Activity

This wording makes it sound like the history is driving the scheduling of the Activity Task, but the history really just documents that it was scheduled.

With that in mind, I suggest rewording:

> In response, the Cluster schedules a new task for the `makePizzas` Activity and logs an `ActivityTaskScheduled` Event into the Event History to reflect that it did so.

Reviewer: > In response to this Command, the Temporal Cluster creates an Activity Task, adds it to the Task Queue, and appends the ActivityTaskScheduled Event to this Workflow Execution's history. 

It sounds like you've described this twice or perhaps your view of  the sequence of events isn't quite right. I encourage you to re-read this paragraph in the transcript and see if that was just an oversight. If you need help or want to talk through this, just let me know. I'm happy to help.

Reviewer: I skimmed through the rest of the transcript and didn't notice any mistakes, but it's hard to visualize what you're describing without seeing it. If you have some slides for the animation (no matter how rough), that would help me to determine if the sequencing is right. If you haven't created them yet, let me know when you have and we can go through them together.

# Signals in the Event History

<iframe width="1040" height="585" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xscX8ffBPOI?rel=0&amp;iv_load_policy=3&amp;modestbranding=1&amp;showsearch=0&amp;showinfo=0&amp;wmode=transparent" title="Signals in the Event History with TypeScript" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<details>
<summary>Video Transcript</summary>

Let's take a look at the Event History of the `Sending Signals` exercise that you just completed. If you haven't completed the exercise yet, please complete the exercise before continuing with this video. You can find the code to the exercise in the previous chapter.

> As a quick debrief, in this chapter, we ran two Workflows: The first Workflow, known as `pizzaWorkflow` - which dealt with calculating the price of the pizzas, returning the order and more. This Workflow listened for a Signal coming from the second Workflow, called `orderFulfilled` Workflow. The `orderFulfilled` Workflow was responsible for fulfilling the order like managing the processes for delivering and making the pizzas. If the order was fulfilled successfully, it sent a Signal to `pizzaWorkflow`, letting it know that the order was done successfully. Once `pizzaWorkflow` received this Signal, then it completes successfully with the order details and bills the customer. If it receives a Signal that the order was not fulfilled, it does not bill the customer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a quick debrief, in this chapter, we ran two Workflows. The first Workflow, known as `pizzaWorkflow`, dealt with calculating the price of the pizzas, returning the order and more. This Workflow listened for a Signal coming from the second Workflow, called `orderFulfilled` Workflow. The `orderFulfilled` Workflow was responsible for fulfilling the order like managing the processes for delivering and making the pizzas. If the order was fulfilled successfully, it sent a Signal to `pizzaWorkflow`, letting it know that the order was done successfully. Once `pizzaWorkflow` received this Signal, it then completes successfully with the order details and bills the customer. If it receives a Signal that the order was not fulfilled, it does not bill the customer.
```

Author: changed

We already have the Temporal server and worker running. I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows: `signal-fulfilled-order-Z1238` and `pizza-workflow-order-Z1238`. Let's take a look at the Workflow that sends a Signal first, the `fulfillOrderWorkflow`.

We'll go ahead and speed through some of the initial steps since they should be a review from our "Exploring Durable Execution" courses. The first Events that occur will be `WorkflowExecutionStarted`, `WorkflowTaskScheduled`, and `WorkflowTaskStarted`.

> We already have the Temporal server and worker running. I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows.

Reviewer 2: Is this duplicated from above?

Author: Yeah repeated by accident. Removing now.

We already have the Temporal Cluster and Worker running. I will now go ahead and run the Workflows. Over on the Web UI, we can see our two completed Workflows: `signal-fulfilled-order-Z1238` and `pizza-workflow-order-Z1238`: the Workflow that receives the Signal and the External Workflow that sends the Signal. Let's take a look at the Workflow that sends a Signal first, `signal-fulfilled-order-Z1238` which correlates with `fulfillOrderWorkflow`.

We will go ahead and speed through some of the initial steps since they should be a review from our "Exploring Durable Execution" courses. For brevity, I’ve removed the beginning of this file which includes the import statements.

> When the Workflow Execution began, it invoked the `fulfillOrderWorkflow` function.

Reviewer 3: At this point, you may want to mention the fact that `getExternalWorkflowHandle()` does not results in a command / no round trip / no check for either the target workflow actually exists.

The first Events that occurred were `WorkflowExecutionStarted`, `WorkflowTaskScheduled`, and `WorkflowTaskStarted`.

> Now, the Worker can't make further progress on the Workflow until the following Activity Execution, `makePizzas` concludes, so it notifies the Cluster that the current Workflow Task is complete resulting in a `WorkflowTaskCompleted` Event.

Reviewer 3: The order of descriptions on this slide feels backward. That should be:

- Workflow code call `makePizzas`, which is an activity. The worker creates a command for that activity.
- Then the worker can't make further progress until activity execution concludes.
- Therefore, the worker notify the server of WFT completion, with the schedule activity command.
- The server adds the WorkflowTaskCompleted event to history, as well as the  ActivityTaskScheduled event (both writes happens as a single atomic operation).

In response to the `await makePizzas` line, the Worker creates a Command representing the Activity Execution required to make further progress. It then sends a message to the Temporal Cluster notifying it that the current Workflow task is complete and sending the Command. The Cluster adds the `WorkflowTaskCompleted` to the History.

In response, the Cluster schedules a new task for the `makePizzas` Activity and logs an `ActivityTaskScheduled` Event into the Event History to reflect that it did so.

The Worker polls for the Task Queue for a task.

Since the Worker Process has capacity to perform additional work, it accepts the Activity Task. The Worker Entity now invokes the function corresponding to the Activity Definition for the `makePizzas` Activity. The Worker then runs the code within the function.

> When the Activity function returns, the Worker notifies the cluster that the Activity Task is complete, resulting in `ActivityTaskCompleted`.

Reviewer 3: To be exact, the `WorkflowTaskScheduled` event is added at the very same time as the `ActivityTaskCompleted` event.

Back to the Workflow code, the Worker continues where it left off, resulting again in `WorkflowTaskScheduled`, and `WorkflowTaskStarted` Events added to the Event History.

> However, it once again results in another `WorkflowTaskCompleted`, because the Worker can't make further progress until `deliverPizzas` concludes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, the workflow code call the `deliverPizzas` activity, which again blocks further progress. The Worker therefore complete the current workflow task, and send back to the cluster a ScheduleActivityTask command for the `deliverPizzas` activity.
```

> The Worker works on this Activity, once again adding `ActivityTaskScheduled`, `ActivityTaskStarted`, and `ActivityTaskCompleted` to the Event History.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Worker works on this Activity, once again adding `ActivityTaskStarted`, and `ActivityTaskCompleted` to the Event History.
```

Reviewer 3: Note that there is a WFT Scheduled and WFT Started events missing in the history between the ActTaskCompleted and SignalExternalWf events

Now, we get to our Signal. Here, we grabbed a handle of the `pizzaWorkflow` by calling the `getExternalWorkflowHandle` method. This method retrieves a handle of another Workflow using its Workflow ID, and allows the Workflow to send a Signal from within a Workflow

> This results in the `SignalExternalWorkflowExecutionInitiated` Event, which indicates that the Temporal Server will try to Signal the targeted Workflow. This Event type contains the Signal name - `pizzaOrderFulfilled`, as well as a Signal payload, which is `true`. The corresponding command to this Event is `SignalExternalWorkflowExecution`.

Reviewer 3: Order of description is incorrect:

1. The worker queue up the SignalExtWf command;
2. Workflow can't progress (blocked awaiting for the SignalExtWf call)
3. Worker notify server of WFT Completion + queued up commands (in this case, the SignalExtWf command)
4. The server record the WFT Completion + SignalExtWfInitiated events to this workflow history.

> The next Event on the Event History is `ExternalWorkflowExecutionSignaled`. This Event type indicates that the Temporal Server has successfully Signaled the targeted Workflow. This Event does not directly correspond to a Command issued by the Workflow that sends the Signal.

Reviewer 3: The server simultaneously schedule a new wf task, to allow the workflow to resume execution.

> After the Signal, the Worker continues where it left off, executing the remaining statements in the Workflow Definition. This results in `WorkflowTaskScheduled` and `WorkflowTaskStarted` Events added to the Event History. The Workflow returns the value, ‘order fulfilled’, signifying the successful end of the Workflow. The `WorkflowTaskCompleted` and `WorkflowExecutionCompleted` Events are then added to the Event History.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After that, the Worker picks up the workflow task, and continues execution of the workflow where it left off, executing the remaining statements in the Workflow Definition. This results in `WorkflowTaskStarted` Events added to the Event History. The Workflow returns the value, ‘order fulfilled’, signifying the successful end of the Workflow. The server consequently adds `WorkflowTaskCompleted` and `WorkflowExecutionCompleted` Events to the Event History, which closes the workflow execution.
```

We will now take a look at the Event History of the Workflow that is receiving the Signal, which is the `pizzaWorkflow`.

> We will go ahead and skip the through the step-by-step walk through of the code up to this point of processing the Signal, but go ahead and pause the screen if you'd like to review what the Event History would look like for the Workflow Execution thus far. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will go ahead and skip directly to this point where the workflow is waiting for the incoming Signal. But if you want, feel free to pause this video if you want to review what the Event History so far. 
```

> Don't forget we have the `orderFulfilled` Workflow running in parallel. In the next line, we use `condition` to pause the execution of the Workflow until a certain condition is met. In this case, the Workflow execution will be paused until the Signal is received.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Don't forget we have the `orderFulfilled` Workflow running in parallel. In the next line, we use `condition` to pause the execution of the Workflow until a certain condition is met. In this case, the Workflow execution will be paused until the `signalProcessed` variable is set to `true`.
```

> Since the Signal is now received, we add `WorkflowExecutionSignaled` to the Event History. This Event type indicates the Workflow has received a Signal Event. The Event type contains the Signal name - `pizzaOrderFulfilled`, as well as a Signal payload, which is `true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, remember that we have the `orderFulfilled` Workflow running in parallel. And at some point, the `orderFulfilled` send the `fulfillOrderSignal` to this execution. When that happens, the server record a `WorkflowExecutionSignaled` event to this workflow's Event History. This Event type indicates the Workflow has _received_ a Signal Event. The Event type contains the Signal name - `pizzaOrderFulfilled`, as well as a Signal payload, which is `true`.

The server also immediately schedule a new workflow task, to allow the worker to continue execution of the workflow where it left off.
```

Reviewer 3: Could be useful to highlight the difference between events for _sending_ a signal (SignalExternalWorkflowExecutionInitiated and ExternalWorkflowExecutionSignaled) vs the one for _receiving_ a signal (`WorkflowExecutionSignaled`). People often get confused between these.

> After the Signal is received, the Worker continues where it left off, executing the remaining statements in the Workflow Definition.

Reviewer 3: I think you should add an extra slide to demonstrate the signal handling in the workflow code, i.e. entering the handler's anonymous function, setting `signalProcessed` to true, then back to the `condition`, which now passes... and after that skip ahead to completion of the wfx.
